INDIAN CONSTITUTION - KEY ARTICLES (Sample)

PART III - FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS

Article 12 - Definition of State
In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, the State includes the Government and Parliament of India and the Government and the Legislature of each of the States and all local or other authorities within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India.

Article 13 - Laws inconsistent with or in derogation of the fundamental rights
(1) All laws in force in the territory of India immediately before the commencement of this Constitution, in so far as they are inconsistent with the provisions of this Part, shall, to the extent of such inconsistency, be void.
(2) The State shall not make any law which takes away or abridges the rights conferred by this Part and any law made in contravention of this clause shall, to the extent of the contravention, be void.

Article 14 - Equality before law
The State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws within the territory of India.

Article 19 - Protection of certain rights regarding freedom of speech, etc.
(1) All citizens shall have the right—
(a) to freedom of speech and expression;
(b) to assemble peaceably and without arms;
(c) to form associations or unions;
(d) to move freely throughout the territory of India;
(e) to reside and settle in any part of the territory of India;
(g) to practise any profession, or to carry on any occupation, trade or business.

Article 21 - Protection of life and personal liberty
No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure established by law.

Article 21A - Right to Education
The State shall provide free and compulsory education to all children of the age of six to fourteen years in such manner as the State may, by law, determine.

Article 22 - Protection against arrest and detention in certain cases
(1) No person who is arrested shall be detained in custody without being informed, as soon as may be, of the grounds for such arrest nor shall he be denied the right to consult, and to be defended by, a legal practitioner of his choice.

PART IV - DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY

Article 44 - Uniform civil code for the citizens
The State shall endeavour to secure for the citizens a uniform civil code throughout the territory of India.

Article 45 - Provision for early childhood care and education to children below the age of six years
The State shall endeavour to provide early childhood care and education for all children until they complete the age of six years.

Article 51A - Fundamental Duties
It shall be the duty of every citizen of India—
(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the National Flag and the National Anthem;
(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle for freedom;
(f) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;
(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers and wild life, and to have compassion for living creatures.
